Add documentation for SearchV2 (#250)
rwth-i6/rasr: doc/search_v2.rst

SearchV2 Framework
===================

SearchV2 is RASR's newer decoding framework for neural, end-to-end style recognizers (CTC, RNN-T/transducer,
Attention encoder-decoder, ...). It replaces the acoustic feature scoring of the classic
:ref:`Decoder` (``Search::SearchAlgorithm`` + ``Mm::FeatureScorer``) with a self-contained
:ref:`label scorer <SearchV2 Label Scorers>` abstraction, so the search algorithm itself no longer needs to know
from which model topology the scores come from.

This page describes SearchV2 from a user's perspective: which search algorithms and label scorers are available, how to
configure them, and how to wire them into an Flf network or a ``librasr`` Python session. It does not require reading

> any C++ code.

Reviewer: 😆 . You do mention the C++ class names a lot here though.

Author: mentioning C++ class names != explaining code != requiring the reader to read code :smile:

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
--------

``SearchV2`` and the classic ``Search`` framework can both be present in the same RASR build. They are selected
per use case, not globally.

* **Classic search** (``Search::SearchAlgorithm``, mostly ``AdvancedTreeSearch``) drives the search with
  acoustic scores from a ``Mm::FeatureScorer`` (GMMs, hybrid NN/HMM). It is used by the :ref:`recognizer` Flf node

>   and by ``speech-recognizer``.

Reviewer: I guess you mean the speech-recognizer binary? If so I would clarify that here.

The SearchV2 framework is intentionally kept simple. Instead of one large monolithic search implementation with
many different configuration options, it contains smaller, more specialized search algorithms for different use-cases
and various label scorers for different models.

Core workflow
-------------

Every SearchV2 algorithm implements the ``Search::SearchAlgorithmV2`` interface and is driven the same way,
whether it is invoked by the :ref:`recognizer-v2` node or by Python:

#. Determine which parts of a :ref:`Model Combination <Common component configuration>` the algorithm needs
   (lexicon, acoustic model, language model, label scorer(s)) and construct them accordingly.
#. Signal the start of a new segment/utterance.
#. Feed feature vectors one at a time, or in batches, as they become available.
#. Optionally trigger explicit decoding steps and query intermediate ("streaming") results.
#. Signal the end of the segment, which finalizes the search for all fed features.
#. Retrieve the final result, either as a single-best traceback or as a word lattice.

Since features are pushed in and results are pulled out independently, the same algorithm implementation can

> be used both for offline decoding of a full corpus and for online/streaming decoding, without any change to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used both for offline/batch decoding and for online/streaming decoding, without any change to
```

configuration.

Search algorithms
-----------------

Four search algorithms are currently implemented on top of SearchV2. Which one to pick depends on the type of model
and vocabulary you use:

* ``lexiconfree-timesync-beam-search``: time-synchronous decoding, no pronunciation lexicon required. Typical
  use case: CTC / neural monotonic transducer models.
* ``lexiconfree-labelsync-beam-search``: label-synchronous decoding, no pronunciation lexicon required. Typical
  use case: attention encoder-decoder (AED) models and Speech LLMs.
* ``tree-timesync-beam-search``: time-synchronous decoding over a pronunciation lexicon search tree, with a

>   word-level language model. The topology of the tree itself (HMM, CTC, RNA, AED, ...) is a separate choice,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  word-level language model. The topology of the tree itself (HMM, CTC, RNA, ...) is a separate choice,
```

  see :ref:`Search tree types` below.
* ``tree-labelsync-beam-search``: label-synchronous counterpart to ``tree-timesync-beam-search``, decoding over
  a pronunciation lexicon search tree built with the ``aed`` tree builder, with a word-level language model.

> The "lexiconfree" searches treat every entry of the lexicon as a single output token and do not build a

Reviewer: I would mention that they technically still require a lexicon before this sentence, otherwise it's hard to understand why this explanation is necessary.

PS: see also the sentence in the next paragraph. Pick your favorite way of merging the two.

pronunciation search tree or apply a word-level transition model.
The "tree" searches (also called lexicon-constrained) build a prefix tree from the pronunciation lexicon
and additionally scores a language model at word ends.

Lexicon requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Even though the "lexiconfree" searches do not build a lexical prefix tree, a lexicon is still required.

> Each lemma is treated as one output label and the lemma's index in the lexicon must match the corresponding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each lemma in the lexicon is treated as one output label and the lemma's index in the lexicon must match the corresponding
```

output index of the label scorer (e.g. the softmax index of a CTC/transducer/AED model). ``blank-label-index``,
``silence-label-index`` and ``sentence-end-label-index`` (see below) are likewise resolved as the ``id()`` of the
lemma marked ``special="blank"``/``"silence"``/``"sentence-end"``/``"sentence-boundary"`` respectively.

There are two ways to provide such a lexicon:

> * A full Bliss XML lexicon (``file = /path/to/lexicon.xml.gz``, the default ``xml`` format). Here it is the

Reviewer: What do you want to say with the text inside the brackets?

      [*.lexicon]
      file = vocab-text:/path/to/labels.txt

  (``vocab-txt:`` is accepted as an equivalent qualifier.) This format was built specifically for lexicon-free
  searches: the phoneme inventory and the lemma list are both constructed from the same line-ordered list, so the
  Nth line always becomes both the Nth phoneme and the Nth lemma. The label-index/lemma-index correspondence is
  therefore guaranteed automatically, with no risk of the two getting out of sync. ``labels.txt`` for the same
  3-label vocabulary as above would simply be:

  .. code-block:: text

      A
      B
      C

  The disadvantage of this format is that it has no way to mark special lemmata. Every line just becomes a plain label.
  So ``blank-label-index``, ``silence-label-index`` and ``sentence-end-label-index`` cannot be inferred from a
  ``vocab-text``/``vocab-txt`` lexicon and must be passed explicitly as parameters to the search algorithm instead.

The "tree" searches, in contrast, always need a full pronunciation lexicon (the ``xml`` format). They build the
prefix search tree directly from its pronunciations, so the ``vocab-text``/``vocab-txt`` format does not apply

> there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prefix search tree directly from its pronunciations, so the ``vocab-text``/``vocab-txt`` format is not suitable
for them.
```

  CTC/transducer models do. Use this for AED label scorers when decoding over a closed vocabulary with
  ``tree-labelsync-beam-search``.
* ``hmm``: builds a tree supporting optional diphone (not triphone) cross-word context, without minimization and
  without skip-transitions. Cross-word context is applied per phoneme, not tree-wide: only phonemes marked
  context-dependent in the lexicon's phoneme inventory get a coarticulated root state and thus cross-word
  diphone modeling; phonemes marked context-independent use the plain context-independent root and get no
  cross-word context at all. A lighter-weight option for GMM or hybrid NN/HMM acoustic models when full triphone
  modeling isn't needed. Sub-parameter: ``add-ci-transitions`` (bool, default ``false``) -- insert context-independent
  acoustic transitions between words, useful for non-fluid (isolated-word-like) speech even when the acoustic
  model was trained on fluent speech. Warning: this tree builder is currently experimental and has not been fully
  tested; some edge cases or input configurations may not be handled correctly yet.

> Multiple label scorers and per-stage parameters

Reviewer: What is missing from the description of the label scorers is which transition type preset they have. I think that would be helpful to have here. Maybe you could also discuss how to add / remove scored transitions first and then introduce the presets.

Author: Oh right, I completely forgot about that. That's a really important point though. I will add something, thank you for the reminder.

In general thanks a lot for your extensive feedback!

------------------------------------------------

> All three algorithms can use more than one label scorer at once (e.g. an acoustic model scorer plus a separate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All new search algorithms can use more than one label scorer at once (e.g. an acoustic model scorer plus a separate
```
Soon there will be a forth, it's better not to hardcode the exact number here.

Author: True, I actually already included the tree-labelsync-search here as we plan to merge it soon

language model scorer), applied one after another with pruning in between. The number of label scorers is set
independently via ``num-label-scorers`` (see below); ``max-beam-size`` and ``score-threshold`` then take one
value **per label scorer**, separated by whitespace, applied in the same order the label scorers are scored:

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm]
    max-beam-size   = 2400 1200
    score-threshold = 20.0 14.0

Here the beam is pruned to 2400 hypotheses (with a score threshold of 20.0) after the first label scorer, and
further pruned to 1200 hypotheses (score threshold 14.0) after the second. If only a single value is given, it is

> used after the (only) label scorer.

Reviewer: Why (only)? I think this sentence needs a bit of clarificaiton.

Author: I'll add some explanation about what happens if more/less values than label scorers are defined here

.. _SearchV2 Label Scorers:

Label scorers
--------------

Instead of a ``Mm::FeatureScorer``, SearchV2 algorithms obtain scores from one or more ``Nn::LabelScorer``
instances, configured under the ``label-scorer`` selector (or ``label-scorer-1``, ``label-scorer-2``, ... if
``num-label-scorers`` is greater than one):

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm]
    num-label-scorers = 1

    [*.search-algorithm.label-scorer]
    type              = state-managed-onnx
    scale             = 1.0
    ; further label-scorer specific parameters, e.g. ONNX model file, I/O tensor names, ...

> Every label scorer constructed this way (whatever its ``type``) is automatically wrapped in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every label scorer constructed this way (whatever its ``type``) is automatically wrapped in an
```

* ``max-cached-score-vectors`` (int): size of the score-vector cache, as for ``stateful-onnx``.

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm.label-scorer]
    type                    = state-managed-onnx
    onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/aed_decoder.onnx
    state-manager.type      = transformer

encoder-decoder / encoder-only
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``encoder-decoder`` is a glue label scorer combining a separate **encoder** (which pre-processes raw input
features into encoded representations, without needing any scoring context) with a **decoder**, which is any
other label scorer from this list (typically ``state-managed-onnx`` or ``stateful-onnx``) that consumes the
encoder output. It automatically handles passing encoder output into the decoder as it becomes available.
``encoder-only`` is the same idea without a "real" decoder: the encoder output *is* the score (wrapped in a
trivial pass-through decoder), used when encoder and output/CTC layer are exported as a single ONNX graph.

* ``encoder.type`` (``onnx``/``chunked-onnx``): which encoder implementation to use. Default ``onnx``.

> * ``encoder.onnx-model.*`` : the encoder's ONNX model, configured like ``onnx-model`` above.

Reviewer: I would put the exact encoder configuration in separate sub-sections as they are different objects and we expect more to appear (e.g. Torch).

Author: Please check if you are okay with how I changed it or if you would do it differently. I also already added a placeholder for the Torch encoder

Reviewer: I was thinking of having it as a separate section, i.e. as a sibling to label scorers, but this also works for me.

Author: Ah no, I'm also fine with putting it in a separate section and add a reference pointing to it. This is actually cleaner.

    encoder.step-size               = 25
    encoder.left-padding            = 10
    encoder.right-padding           = 5
    encoder.onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/encoder.onnx
    decoder.type                    = state-managed-onnx
    decoder.onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/decoder.onnx

ctc-prefix
^^^^^^^^^^^

Wraps a time-synchronous CTC scorer (any other label scorer producing per-frame CTC-style scores, e.g.
``no-context-onnx`` or ``encoder-only``) and derives label-*synchronous* prefix scores from it, by summing over
all the time-synchronous CTC alignments consistent with a given label prefix. This lets a CTC model's scores be
used together with a label-synchronous search such as ``lexiconfree-labelsync-beam-search``, e.g. to combine an
AED and a CTC model at the label level.

* ``blank-label-index`` (int): index of the blank label in the wrapped CTC scorer's vocabulary. Default ``0``,
  but should always be set explicitly to match your vocabulary.
* ``vocab-size`` (int): number of labels in the wrapped CTC scorer's vocabulary. Default ``0``, but must be set
  explicitly -- a default of ``0`` produces a degenerate, empty score matrix.

> * ``label-scorer.*`` : configuration of the wrapped time-synchronous CTC label scorer (nested selector).

Reviewer: Here we could reference the stateless onnx label scorer again.

Author: I guess you mean no-context-onnx? Yes, good idea

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm.label-scorer]
    type                                 = ctc-prefix
    blank-label-index                    = 0
    vocab-size                           = 5000
    label-scorer.type                    = no-context-onnx
    label-scorer.onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/ctc_head.onnx

combine
^^^^^^^^

Log-linearly combines multiple sub-label-scorers into a single one, assuming all sub-scorers share the same
label alphabet: ``combined_score = sum_i(score_i * scale_i)``. The combined timeframe is the maximum over the

> sub-scorers' timeframes. This is the usual way to log-linearly combine e.g. an acoustic model scorer and a

Reviewer: Since when is this the usual way?

* ``scorer-<i>.*`` (for ``i`` from ``1`` to ``num-scorers``): configuration of the ``i``-th sub-scorer,
  including its own ``type``.
* ``scorer-<i>.scale`` (float): log-linear weight of the ``i``-th sub-scorer's score. This is just the same
  implicit ``scale`` parameter every label scorer has (see :ref:`SearchV2 Label Scorers` above), applied here
  once per sub-scorer since each ``scorer-<i>`` is itself a full label scorer. Default ``1.0``.

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm.label-scorer]
    type                             = combine
    num-scorers                      = 2
    scorer-1.type                    = state-managed-onnx
    scorer-1.scale                   = 1.0
    scorer-1.onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/am.onnx
    scorer-2.type                    = state-managed-onnx
    scorer-2.scale                   = 0.3
    scorer-2.onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/lm.onnx

transition
^^^^^^^^^^^

Returns a fixed, configured score for each transition type, independent of any input features or label
history. Useful to model e.g. label-loop penalties or blank/word/sentence-end exit penalties analogous to HMM

> transition penalties, without needing a model to produce them. Recognized transition types are

Reviewer: A list where you group by source type would be easier to read here.

            # extended_scoring_context) to score in one batch.
            # Return a list with, for each context, either None (not enough input buffered yet to score it)
            # or a tuple (score_list, timestamp).
            return self.model.score_batch(contexts, self.buffered_inputs)

    librasr.register_label_scorer_type("my-torch-scorer", MyTorchLabelScorer)

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm.label-scorer]
    type = my-torch-scorer
    ; any additional keys your __init__ reads from `config`

Register the type *before* constructing the ``SearchAlgorithm``/``Configuration`` that references it. Python
label scorers can be freely combined with native ones, e.g. wrapped in ``combine`` alongside an ONNX-based
scorer, or used as the ``decoder`` of an ``encoder-decoder`` label scorer.

* ``librasr.register_label_scorer_type(name, label_scorer_cls)`` : register ``label_scorer_cls`` (a subclass of
  ``librasr.LabelScorer``) under ``name``, making it selectable via ``label-scorer.type = <name>`` in any config
  from then on, for the lifetime of the process.
* ``librasr.TransitionType`` : enum mirroring the C++ ``Nn::TransitionType`` values used elsewhere in this

>   document (``LABEL_TO_LABEL``, ``LABEL_LOOP``, ``LABEL_TO_BLANK``, ``BLANK_TO_LABEL``, ``BLANK_LOOP``,

Reviewer: I would link them here not repeat. Otherwise new types need to be added in multiple places.

Author: Ok, but I will add a note that they have to be in caps and in snake case

SearchV2 Framework
===================

``SearchV2`` is RASR's newer decoding framework for neural, end-to-end style recognizers (CTC, RNN-T/transducer,

> Attention encoder-decoder, ...). It replaces the acoustic feature scoring of the classic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``SearchV2`` is RASR's newer decoding framework for neural, end-to-end style recognizers (CTC, neural transducer,
Attention encoder-decoder, Speech LLM, ...). It replaces the acoustic feature scoring of the classic
```

:ref:`Decoder` (``Search::SearchAlgorithm`` + ``Mm::FeatureScorer``) with a self-contained
:ref:`label scorer <SearchV2 Label Scorers>` abstraction, so the search algorithm itself no longer needs to know
from which model topology the scores come from.

This page describes ``SearchV2`` from a user's perspective: which search algorithms and label scorers are available, how to
configure them, and how to wire them into an Flf network or a ``librasr`` Python session.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
--------

``SearchV2`` and the classic ``Search`` framework can both be present in the same RASR build. They are selected
per use case, not globally.

* **Classic search** (``Search::SearchAlgorithm``, mostly ``AdvancedTreeSearch``) drives the search with
  acoustic scores from a ``Mm::FeatureScorer`` (GMMs, hybrid NN/HMM). It is used by the :ref:`recognizer` Flf node
  and by the ``speech-recognizer`` binary.
* **SearchV2** (``Search::SearchAlgorithmV2``) drives the search by pulling scores directly from one or more
  :ref:`label scorers <SearchV2 Label Scorers>` (typically wrapping an ONNX model). It is used by the

>   :ref:`recognizer-v2` Flf node and by the ``librasr`` Python bindings.

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain the difference that the LabelScorer is context-aware and can be forwarded during the search process based on hypothesis context while the FeatureScorer assumes that the scores are purely based on acoustic feature input.

Use ``SearchV2`` if your acoustic/language model is a neural end-to-end model (CTC, transducer, attention
encoder-decoder).
Use the classic search for GMM or hybrid NN/HMM systems, or when you need one of the more specialized classic
searches (WFST-based search, linear search, ...).

Both frameworks produce the same kind of output (a single-best traceback and/or an Flf word lattice), so
downstream lattice processing (rescoring, CTM writing, ...) works the same way regardless of which search
produced the lattice.

The ``SearchV2`` framework is intentionally kept simple. Instead of one large monolithic search implementation with
many different configuration options, it contains smaller, more specialized search algorithms for different use-cases
and various label scorers for different models.

Core workflow
-------------

Every ``SearchV2`` algorithm implements the ``Search::SearchAlgorithmV2`` interface and is driven the same way,
whether it is invoked by the :ref:`recognizer-v2` node or by Python:

#. Determine which parts of a :ref:`Model Combination <Common component configuration>` the algorithm needs

>    (lexicon, acoustic model, language model, label scorer(s)) and construct them accordingly.

Reviewer 2: The term "acoustic model" here could be confusing to readers. This is what its called internally RASR but in the new searches we only use it for state tying and tree topology.

Author: Yeah, that's true, but how would you put it then? Use remove the term "acoustic model" here?

Reviewer 2: I would write down the sub-components of the AcousticModel mode, i.e., "state tying" and "transition model".

#. Signal the start of a new segment/utterance.

> #. Feed feature vectors one at a time, or in batches, as they become available.

Reviewer 2: "in chunks" rather than "in batches".

The "tree" searches, in contrast, always need a full pronunciation lexicon (the ``xml`` format). They build the
prefix search tree directly from its pronunciations, so the ``vocab-text``/``vocab-txt`` format is not suitable
for them.

Selecting an algorithm
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The search algorithm is selected with the ``type`` parameter under the ``search-algorithm`` configuration selector:

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm]
    type = lexiconfree-timesync-beam-search
    ; other options: lexiconfree-labelsync-beam-search, tree-timesync-beam-search, tree-labelsync-beam-search

If unset, ``type`` defaults to ``lexiconfree-timesync-beam-search``.

All parameters shown in the sections below are relative to that same ``search-algorithm`` selector, e.g. the
full path of ``max-beam-size`` is ``*.search-algorithm.max-beam-size``.

lexiconfree-timesync-beam-search
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A simple time-synchronous beam search without a pronunciation lexicon, word-level language model or transition model.
Intended for open-vocabulary decoding with CTC and neural transducer style or similar models. Supports

> an optional blank label (for CTC/transducer) and optional silence and sentence-end labels.

Reviewer 2: For all searches I would add an outline of score-contribution, pruning and recombination steps. It doesn't need to include optimizations such as on-the-fly pre-pruning but users should get an idea which sets of extensions/hypotheses are pruned in which order.

Author: Agree, but as I already commented above, we will need such an explanation for the new pruning concept of the labelsync-searches. We could then of course also explain it for the timesync-searches. If you are okay, I would however postpone this and take care of it as soon as we have the labelsync-searches updated.

* ``max-beam-size`` (int list): maximum number of hypotheses kept in the beam. Pruning is applied after every
  label scorer in the pipeline (see :ref:`SearchV2 Label Scorers`), so one value is expected per configured

>   label scorer. Default: unset, i.e. no beam-size pruning is applied.

Reviewer 2: "Default: unset, i.e. no beam-size pruning is applied" is wrong. The user has to provide as many max-beam-size values as there are label scorers, otherwise the search will throw an error. Beam-size pruning always has to be applied as a fallback.

Author: Good catch!

* ``score-threshold`` (float list): prune hypotheses whose score is worse than the current best by more than
  this amount. Also applied once per label scorer. Default: unset, i.e. no score-based pruning is applied.
* ``num-histogram-bins`` (int): number of bins used for histogram pruning (minor effect on results/speed). Default ``100``.
* ``blank-label-index`` (int): lexicon index of the blank label. Inferred automatically from a lemma with
  ``special="blank"`` if present; if neither is set, blank handling is disabled. Default: disabled.
* ``silence-label-index`` (int): lexicon index of the silence label, inferred from ``special="silence"`` if unset.
  Default: disabled.
* ``sentence-end-label-index`` (int): lexicon index of the sentence-end label, inferred from
  ``special="sentence-end"``/``special="sentence-boundary"`` if unset. Default: disabled.
* ``collapse-repeated-labels`` (bool): collapse repeated emission of the same label into a single output

>   (typical for CTC-style label loops). Default ``false``.

Reviewer 2: For this parameter I have seen some confusion from users before. Maybe we should expand the documentation for this one and add examples that show what effect this has.

* ``recombination-mode`` (``on``/``off``): recombine hypotheses that share the same label scorer state

>   (keeping only the best), like word-history recombination in the classic search. Default ``on``.

Reviewer 2: You could add some explanation here. If you turn this off, redundant hypotheses will stay alive but you save the recombination cost itself. So you should only turn this off if recombination will never happen anyway (e.g. full alignment-level context) and/or the recombination itself is very expensive (e.g. when you have a large vocabulary and no score-pruning enabled, resulting in a ton of extension candidates).

* ``maximum-stable-delay-pruning-interval`` (int): how often (in search steps) the above pruning is applied. Default ``10``.
* ``log-stepwise-statistics`` (bool): log beam statistics at every search step, useful for tuning and debugging. Default ``false``.

Example config:

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm]
    type                     = lexiconfree-timesync-beam-search
    max-beam-size            = 5000
    score-threshold          = 14.0
    blank-label-index        = 0
    collapse-repeated-labels = true
    recombination-mode       = on

lexiconfree-labelsync-beam-search
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A label-synchronous beam search, again without a pronunciation lexicon, word-level language model or
transition model. Hypotheses are terminated by an explicit sentence-end symbol rather than by running out of
input frames. Its main purpose is open-vocabulary search with attention encoder-decoder (AED) or similar
models.

* ``max-beam-size`` (int list), ``score-threshold`` (float list), ``num-histogram-bins`` (int),
  ``recombination-mode``, ``log-stepwise-statistics``, ``cache-cleanup-interval``: same meaning as for

>   ``lexiconfree-timesync-beam-search`` above.

Reviewer 2: I would add something for the score-thresholds. It should be mentioned how they interact with the length normalization.

Author: I will add something, but we will need to change a part of the explanation for the labelsync search anyway when we add the separate pruning of active and terminated hyps. I think I'll take care of this when I implement this feature for the tree-labelsync-search

  Inferred from ``special="sentence-end"``/``special="sentence-boundary"`` if unset.
* ``length-norm-scale`` (float): exponent for length normalization; scaled scores are computed as
  ``score / length^length-norm-scale``. Default ``0.0`` (no normalization). If set, ``score-threshold`` is
  applied to the un-normalized score before normalization.
* ``max-labels-per-timestep`` (float): maximum number of emitted labels per input timestep (as consumed via
  ``putFeature``/``putFeatures``), used to bound hypothesis length relative to the input length. Default ``1.0``.

Example config:

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm]
    type                    = lexiconfree-labelsync-beam-search
    max-beam-size           = 50
    score-threshold         = 5.0
    length-norm-scale       = 1.0
    max-labels-per-timestep = 1.2

tree-timesync-beam-search
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A time-synchronous beam search that decodes over a prefix tree built from the pronunciation lexicon. Similar
in structure to the classic tree search, but scored via label scorer(s) instead of a feature scorer. A

> language model score is added at word ends, to disable it, don't set a file or type for the LM and set its scale

Reviewer 2: I would add explicitly that if no LM is configured, RASR will still use a zerogram as default.

to ``0.0``. Within-word and word-end hypotheses are pruned separately.

This algorithm requires a lexicon, an acoustic model (used only to build the search tree, i.e. for allophones
and state tying, not for scoring) and a language model, in addition to the label scorer(s).

* ``max-beam-size`` (int list): maximum number of *within-word* hypotheses in the beam, one value per label scorer.
  Default: unset, i.e. no beam-size pruning is applied.
* ``max-word-end-beam-size`` (int): maximum number of *word-end* hypotheses kept. If unset, word-end
  hypotheses are pruned together with within-word hypotheses using the same global beam. Default: unset.
* ``score-threshold`` (float list): score-based pruning of *within-word* hypotheses, one value per label scorer.
  Default: unset, i.e. no score-based pruning is applied.
* ``word-end-score-threshold`` (float): score-based pruning of *word-end* hypotheses, relative to
  ``score-threshold``. If unset, word-end hypotheses use global score pruning. Default: unset.
* ``num-histogram-bins`` (int): see above. Default ``100``.

> * ``collapse-repeated-labels`` (bool): see above. Default ``false``.

Reviewer 2: Users might be confused how this parameter interacts with the search tree topology.

  acoustic model: ``ctc``, ``rna``, ``aed`` or ``hmm`` (``classic-hmm`` and ``minimized-hmm`` only work for
  ``Search`` and are not compatible with ``SearchV2``). Choose the one matching your model's topology.
  See :ref:`Search tree types` below for a full description of each. **This must always be set explicitly**:
  the code-level default when unset is ``minimized-hmm``, which is not compatible with ``SearchV2`` (see below).

Example config:

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm]
    type                     = tree-timesync-beam-search
    max-beam-size            = 5000
    max-word-end-beam-size   = 200
    score-threshold          = 14.0
    word-end-score-threshold = 0.5
    tree-builder-type        = ctc

    [*.lexicon]
    file                     = /path/to/lexicon.xml.gz

    [*.acoustic-model]
    ; allophones / state-tying configuration, see "Common component configuration"

    [*.language-model]
    type                     = ARPA
    file                     = /path/to/lm.gz
    scale                    = 1.5

The search tree is cached on disk next to the lexicon after it is built the first time, so subsequent runs

> with the same lexicon/acoustic-model configuration start up faster.

Reviewer 2: Not by default; the cache archive file has to be configured. In the example above, the tree would not be cached.

Scores are negative log-probabilities (i.e. costs), the same convention as the AM/LM scores in the classic
search: lower is better, and a hypothesis's total score is the sum of the (scaled) scores of everything that
contributed to it. A model producing log-probabilities directly (e.g. a ``log_softmax`` output) therefore needs
its sign flipped before being used as a score -- see ``negate-input`` under :ref:`prior / no-op` below for a
built-in way to do this.

Built-in label scorer types include:

* ``no-context-onnx``, ``fixed-context-onnx``, ``stateful-onnx``, ``state-managed-onnx``: forward
  features (and, depending on type, label history/hidden state) through an ONNX model.
* ``encoder-decoder`` / ``encoder-only``: wrap a separate encoder (see ``encoder`` sub-selector) that
  pre-processes features, combined with a decoder label scorer (or no decoder, for encoder-only models).
* ``ctc-prefix``: wraps a time-synchronous CTC scorer and derives label-synchronous prefix scores from it
  (useful with ``lexiconfree-labelsync-beam-search``).
* ``combine``: log-linearly combines multiple sub-label-scorers into one (e.g. AM + LM), configured via nested

>   selectors.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add that most of the time you should prefer to use multiple label scorers and do intermediate pruning instead of a single combine scorer.

* ``encoder.onnx-model.*`` : the encoder's ONNX model, following the same :ref:`ONNX model configuration`
  pattern as the ``*-onnx`` label scorers.

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm.label-scorer.encoder]
    type                    = onnx
    onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/encoder.onnx

chunked-onnx encoder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Like ``onnx``, but splits the input into overlapping chunks forwarded through the encoder separately, useful
to bound memory/latency for long or streaming inputs.

* ``encoder.onnx-model.*`` : as for ``onnx``.
* ``encoder.chunk-size`` / ``step-size`` (int, in input features): size of and shift between consecutive
  chunks. Default ``1`` each.
* ``encoder.left-padding`` / ``right-padding`` (int): additional context padded onto each chunk on either side.
  Default ``0`` each.
* ``encoder.zero-padding`` (bool): whether to pad the first/last chunk with zeros to a uniform size. Default
  ``false``.
* ``encoder.window-type`` (enum): weighting window used to blend overlapping chunk outputs back together.
  Default ``triangular``.
* ``encoder.interpolation-mode`` (enum): how overlapping chunk outputs are interpolated. Default

>   ``no-interpolation``.

Reviewer: What are other possible values?

.. code-block:: ini

    [*.search-algorithm.label-scorer.encoder]
    type                    = chunked-onnx
    chunk-size              = 50
    step-size               = 25
    left-padding            = 10
    right-padding           = 5
    onnx-model.session.file = /path/to/encoder.onnx

torch encoder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``encoder.type = torch``. TODO.

ctc-prefix
^^^^^^^^^^^

Wraps a time-synchronous CTC scorer (any other label scorer producing per-frame CTC-style scores, e.g.
``no-context-onnx`` or ``encoder-only``) and derives label-*synchronous* prefix scores from it, by summing over
all the time-synchronous CTC alignments consistent with a given label prefix. This lets a CTC model's scores be
used together with a label-synchronous search such as ``lexiconfree-labelsync-beam-search``, e.g. to combine an

> AED and a CTC model at the label level.

Reviewer 2: Add a reference to the paper describing in more detail how the algorithm works.

``librasr.Configuration`` object, which mirrors the ``.ini``-style RASR configuration used everywhere else in
this document -- you can build it programmatically, load it from a file, or both:

.. code-block:: python

    import librasr

    config = librasr.Configuration()
    # load a standard RASR config file (same format as used by all other tools/examples in this document)
    config.set_from_file("recognition.config")
    # and/or set individual parameters directly, overriding anything loaded from file
    config.set("*.search-algorithm.type", "lexiconfree-timesync-beam-search")
    config.set("*.search-algorithm.max-beam-size", "12")
    config.set("*.lexicon.file", "/path/to/lexicon.xml.gz")

* ``Configuration()`` : create an empty configuration (default selection root is ``lib-rasr``, so both
  ``*.foo`` and ``lib-rasr.foo`` style keys apply to it).
* ``config.set(name, value="true")`` : set a single configuration key, e.g. ``config.set("*.search-algorithm.type", "tree-timesync-beam-search")``.
* ``config.set_from_file(path)`` : load a ``.ini``-style RASR config file, same as ``--config=path`` for the
  command-line tools. Returns ``True`` on success.

> * ``config[name]`` : read back a resolved value (``__getitem__``), returns ``None`` if unset.

Reviewer 2: Mention that this returns the config values as strings and users might have to post-process them.

    config = librasr.Configuration()
    config.set_from_file("recognition.config")

    search = librasr.SearchAlgorithm(config)

    # simplest usage: recognize one segment given all its features at once
    features = np.load("segment_features.npy")  # shape [T, F] (or [1, T, F])
    traceback = search.recognize_segment(features)
    for item in traceback:
        print(item.lemma, item.start_time, item.end_time, item.am_score, item.lm_score)

The lower-level, step-by-step API (what ``recognize_segment`` does internally) gives you control over streaming
and intermediate results:

.. code-block:: python

    search.enter_segment()             # start a new segment
    for feature_chunk in feature_stream:
        search.put_feature(feature_chunk)      # single feature, shape [F] or [1, F]
        # or: search.put_features(feature_chunk)  # multiple features, shape [T, F] or [1, T, F]

        # optional: peek at an intermediate (possibly unstable) result while streaming
        partial = search.get_current_best_traceback()
    search.finish_segment()            # signal that the segment is complete

    best = search.get_current_best_traceback()      # final single-best result

>     stable = search.get_common_prefix()              # stable prefix shared by all current hypotheses

Reviewer 2: It doesn't make sense to call this after `finish_segment`. At that point, everything is stable. This should be moved to the loop above.

* ``get_current_best_traceback()`` : run any pending decode steps and return the current single-best
  ``Traceback`` (list of ``TracebackItem``). Safe to call mid-segment for streaming/partial results.
* ``get_common_prefix()`` : return the ``Traceback`` of the stable common prefix shared by all currently active
  hypotheses (the part of the result that cannot change anymore, even before the segment ends).
* ``get_current_n_best_list(n)`` : return a list of up to ``n`` ``Traceback`` objects.
* ``recognize_segment(features)`` : convenience method equivalent to ``enter_segment`` + ``put_features`` +
  ``finish_segment`` + ``get_current_best_traceback`` in one call. ``features`` has shape ``[T, F]`` or ``[1, T, F]``.
* ``recognize_segment_n_best(features, n)`` : same, but returns ``get_current_n_best_list(n)``.
* ``model_combination()`` : return the underlying ``ModelCombination`` (see below) for accessing/adjusting
  scales at runtime.

**Traceback / TracebackItem:** a ``Traceback`` is a plain Python list of ``TracebackItem``, each with
read/write attributes ``lemma`` (str), ``am_score`` (float), ``lm_score`` (float), ``start_time`` (int) and

> ``end_time`` (int, both in feature-frame units). ``str(item)`` gives just the lemma.

Reviewer 2: A few more details could be added concerning the traceback item attributes. For example that in label-sync search `start_time` and `end_time` don't refer to timeframes but the position in the output token sequence. And that `am_score` and `lm_score` are the scaled scores. And `lm_score` refers to the word-level LM. If an LM is configured as a label scorer, its scores will contribute to `am_score` instead.
